			    Final Project

		 Harvard Extension School CSCI E-93:
			Computer Architecture

			      Fall 2017

		      Due: December 12-15, 2017

For the final project, based on your architecture design from Problem
Set 2 with appropriate modifications made by you based on comments and
design changes, and using the VHDL code for your ALU, complete the
following assignment.

Please submit your solution to this problem set using "git" with the
tag term-project.


Produce VHDL code for your entire processor design.  This includes the
data path, the ALU, the memory interface, and the sequencing logic.
The final design should be implemented using the Altera DE2-70 or
DE2-115 system in conjunction with the furnished memory subsystem.

The culmination of your final project is to run the assembly language
code that you wrote for your processor in Problem Set 4, Parts 2
through 9 under your processor on the FPGA.  You are welcome to write,
run, and demonstrate additional interesting programs running on your
hardware.

We *will* be holding an elongated class during Final Exam Period (on
Tuesday night, December 12th) that will begin at 6:30 PM ET and will
encompass the time of both section and class.  During that final class
meeting on December 12th, each class member will be responsible for
presenting their design and demonstrating their project.

Each student will be given fifteen minutes for their presentation.  To
keep our final presentations on track, you will show a ten minute
(timing will be enforced) pre-recorded video of a presentation of your
processor followed by a five minute question and answer session.  We
will be enforcing this time constraint.  In advance of the class
meeting, all students should send to the course staff the URL for
their ten minute pre-recorded presentation.  Included in your
presentation should be slides that show your block diagram, clocking
scheme, sequencing logic, interesting design aspects of your logic,
your instruction set, assembler, emulator, special feature(s), and
finally a demo of your project running with the memory subsystem.
Show a small number of programs running on your hardware that
demonstrate the capabilities of your hardware (including any novel
features you have implemented).

Local students will participate in the question and answer session in
person; the Q&A sessions for all distance students will take place
over a web conferencing application.  Distance students should send
their web conferencing ID to the course staff in advance of the final
class meeting.

By 2 PM ET on Friday, December 15th, each class member should submit
(with git tag term-project) a Final Project report which will include
the slides used during your presentation, an overview of the
processor, an up-to-date copy of the processor block diagram, an
up-to-date copy of your processor's instruction set (i.e., your
Principles of Operation manual), VHDL code for the complete design, a
current copy of the source code for your assembler, a current copy of
the source code for your emulator, and documented sample programs for
your processor.


			Last revised 27-Jul-17
